We go back to Wednesday,
June 23, 1943,
and the principal talk
of the Gilead graduation
was delivered by Brother Knorr,
who spoke on the subject
“Work, Patience, and Faith.”
Don’t write that down
because that’s not the theme
that we’re going to consider today.
But we have another member
of the Governing Body, Brother Sam Herd,
and he’s going to speak
on the intriguing theme
“Humbly Humble.”
If I should ask you,
Are you humble students?
and you say yes, then you’re not humble.
But you look humble.
It’s been a good program up until now.
We’ll see what follows.
We all know that we must be humble
through and through.
This is something that Jehovah
requires of all his servants
—not proud to be humble,
but humbly humble.
That’s what pleases God.
So that’s what we’re going to talk about.
But what do we mean by humble?
Well, it’s lowliness of mind.
Certainly, it’s not pompous
—filled to the gills with self-importance.
Jehovah says at Proverbs 8:13:
“I hate self-exaltation and pride.”
So we want to let that sink into our hearts.
Pride is something that Jehovah hates,
but he is pleased
with those who are humble.
Now, you’ve increased
your spiritual knowledge
while attending Gilead School,
but you have not scratched the surface
of what you will know in the future.
Your understanding
of many things has been sharpened
in these few months that you’ve been here,
and now you are eager
to tell others about what you’ve learned.
And there’s certainly
nothing wrong with that;
we can say it’s good.
But here’s a caution:
Be careful;
be extremely careful
not to become a show-off,
standing head and shoulders
above your brothers and sisters
in your branches
or in your congregations.
Don’t toot your horn.
“Get someone else to blow your horn
and the sound will carry twice as far,”
said Will Rogers.
Better yet, consider what Jehovah inspired
to be written at Proverbs 27:2:
“Let someone else praise you,
“and not your own mouth;
others, and not your own lips.”
Now, while it may be true
that they may not know as much as you,
what they do know will carry them
through the end of this system of things
into the new world.
Jehovah loves them
just as much as he loves you.
Now, I heard an experience years ago
about a Bible student
who was just starting to study.
He knows a few things and loves the truth,
as much as he knows.
Then he comes down sick unto death,
and the doctor at the hospital says,
“You must have a blood transfusion.”
But he knows enough,
“No blood for me, no blood transfusion.”
His family is not in the truth,
“Take that blood, Boy!”
“No. No blood for me.”
Others try to get him to take blood.
“No blood for me.”
And so the doctor operates and is successful;
everyone is happy.
Then his teacher
and others in the congregation
are invited to the hospital.
He has something to say.
What is it?
After they gather around his bed,
they’re thinking
that something has gone wrong.
He’s going to have to take blood,
and he’s willing to do it,
when he says,
“Why is it that we don’t take blood?”
Now, he does not know
that the Gentile Times ended in 1914;
he doesn’t know
the difference between sovereignty
and all the other things
that people talk about today.
But he knows the truth
—just a little bit of the truth.
He’s not concerned
with the vindication of God’s name
and his sovereignty
—the rightfulness of God’s rule.
He doesn’t know that much,
but he knows enough
that when his life is on the line,
he’d rather die than break God’s law,
even if he can’t explain that law.
Now, why say all that?
It’s not how much we know
that pleases Jehovah,
but how we feel about what we know
and how we have allowed that knowledge
to increase our love for Jehovah.
Now, I’m going to invite you
to open your Bibles, Bible students
—Gilead students.
Let’s turn to Romans.
We’re going to read the 12th chapter.
We’re going to read a couple of verses.
Where are they found?
Well, verse 3 starts us off.
It says: “For through the undeserved kindness
given to me,
“I tell everyone there among you
not to think more of himself
“than it is necessary to think,
“but to think so as to have a sound mind,
“each one as God has given to him
a measure of faith.”
There it is.
We can’t get too stuck on ourselves
and how much we know.
That’s not what Jehovah wants out of us.
Now look at verse 16:
“Have the same attitude
toward others as toward yourselves;
“do not set your mind on lofty things,
“but be led along with the lowly things.
Do not become wise in your own eyes.”
That’s good counsel isn’t it,
Gilead students?
Excellent counsel.
But, you know, sometimes we need
a little more than a couple of verses
for it to reach the heart.
We need to know a few more things.
Knowledge has been given to us
in great abundance these few months
that we’ve been here at Gilead School,
and we’ve just loved it.
But at 1 Corinthians 8:1,
it tells us something
that we want to think seriously about.
It says: “We know we all have knowledge.”
Now, here it’s coming:
“Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up.”
Now, you’ve got a lot of knowledge,
so be careful
that it does not puff you up
so that you stand
head and shoulders higher
than your brothers
and sisters in the congregation.
Jehovah loves them
just as much as he loves you,
who have this advanced knowledge now
because of your schooling.
Be as humble as a little child,
and Jesus tells us a little bit
about that in Matthew chapter 18.
This is what he said in verses 3 and 4:
“Truly I say to you, unless you turn around
“and become as young children,
“you will by no means enter
into the Kingdom of the heavens.
“Therefore, whoever will humble himself
“like this young child
“is the one who is the greatest
in the Kingdom of the heavens.”
So we say, humbly be humble.
Jehovah God, the Most High,
the Universal Sovereign,
“the King of eternity,” is humble.
This is what King David said of him
in Psalm 18,
‘Your own humility will make me great.’
And it’s God’s humility
that makes us great too.
If Jehovah were not humble,
we would not be here.
Not one of mankind would be alive.
He’s humble,
and He has a right to expect humility
out of each and every one of us.
And we need to help
each other to be humble
—not glorify a human.
So we say this because sometimes
some of our brothers and sisters
look at us
—as members of the Governing Body—
as if we’re already angels,
and all you have to do
is ask our wives if we’re angels.
You’ll get a true story.
We’re not.
We’re just sinners like all the rest of you.
So don’t elevate us
above where we are or what we are.
If we want to elevate anything,
elevate Jehovah.
Now, that doesn’t mean that we feel
that you have wronged us in some way.
No, you haven’t.
You’re just human.
And as humans, we’re filled with sin
and we get carried away.
But help us to be humble, too,
rather than elevating us.
The Bible tells us of Jehovah:
“He stoops down to look on heaven and earth”
—Psalm 113:6.
What does that mean?
Well, he unbends;
he waives the privilege of rank.
Jehovah does that.
So he’s teaching us
to waive the privilege of rank.
We’re all brothers; that’s all we are.
We don’t measure up
as tall as Jesus, we just try to.
We try to dog his steps as best we can.
Follow the example of Jehovah.
He allowed Abraham
to question His righteousness
in purposing to destroy
the wicked cities of Sodom and Gomorrah.
In Genesis chapter 18,
Abraham says,
‘If there are 50 righteous men,
are you still going to destroy everything?’
He says, ‘No, I will not.’
Then Abraham comes back, ‘45?’
He says,
‘No, I will not destroy them.’
‘40?’
‘No, I will not.’
‘30?’
‘No.’
‘20?’
‘10?’
‘No.’
OK, Abraham, that’s enough;
close your mouth.
Now, I added that.
Do you know what the Bible really says?
It says: “When Jehovah
finished speaking to Abraham,
he went his way”
—still humble.
On a couple of occasions
He allowed Moses to reason with Him
as if He was another human.
It took humility for Him
to grant Moses’ pleas, but He did.
Now, what about Jesus?
Was he humble?
Well, let’s take a look
at Philippians 2:5-8.
Can we do that?
Philippians 2:5-8.
Now, we understand that some of you
do not have your iPad or your Bible,
but that’s all right.
You’ll have time to get it later.
Now, here in the second chapter,
we’re able to read starting with verse 5.
It says:
“Keep this mental attitude in you
“that was also in Christ Jesus,
“who, although he
was existing in God’s form,
“gave no consideration to a seizure,
“namely, that he should be equal to God.
“No, but he emptied himself
and took a slave’s form
“and became human.
“More than that,
when he came as a man,
“he humbled himself
and became obedient to the point of death,
yes, death on a torture stake.”
So, yes, Jesus was humble,
and Jesus washed the feet
—the dirty feet—
of his apostles
to show them how to be humble.
That was a job that a servant
should have done, or a slave’s job.
He lowered himself in front of them.
Perhaps he was on his knees
when he washed their feet
—John 13.
Now, why would I say that?
Well, I saw a picture—
I saw a picture
in the office building in Warwick,
a beautiful picture.
Jesus is washing the feet of his apostles.
And where is he at?
He’s on his knees.
Now, the Bible doesn’t say he was on his—
I looked that up;
it didn’t say that in John the 13th chapter.
But, how are you going to wash feet
if you don’t get down toward the feet?
So there he was
—on his knees—
teaching them a lesson.
The apostle Paul
set a fine example of humility.
He called himself ‘a slave of Jesus Christ’
—Philippians 1:1.
Now, if he had not been humble,
he would not have written
these words that I’m about to read:
“For I know that in me,
that is, in my flesh,
“there dwells nothing good;
“for I have the desire to do what is fine
“but not the ability to carry it out.
“For I do not do the good that I wish,
“but the bad that I do not wish
is what I practice”
—Romans 7.
And he was given a supernatural vision,
or visions, I should say,
and revelations.
He was used mightily by Jehovah God.
At Acts 19:11-16,
we’re able to see that.
It says: “And God kept performing
extraordinary powerful works
“through the hands of Paul,
“so that even cloths and aprons
that had touched his body
“were carried to the sick,
“and the diseases left them,
“and the wicked spirits came out.
“But some of the Jews
who traveled around casting out demons
“also tried to use
the name of the Lord Jesus
“over those who had wicked spirits;
“they would say: ‘I solemnly charge you
“by Jesus whom Paul preaches.’
“Now there were seven sons
“of a Jewish chief priest
named Sceva doing this.
“But in answer
the wicked spirit said to them:
“‘I know Jesus
and I am acquainted with Paul;
“but who are you?’
“At that the man
with the wicked spirit leaped on them,
“overpowered them one after the other,
“and prevailed against them,
“so that they fled naked and wounded
out of that house.”
Evidently, they were not humbly humble
for Jesus to let them use his name
to cast out the wicked spirits.
Paul was inspired
to write 14 of the 27 books
of the Christian Greek Scriptures.
Now, he did not get bigheaded,
but he stayed humble.
He’s not the only humble soul.
Here’s another one:
Nathan H. Knorr,
the third president
of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society,
wants to visit a member
of the Writing Department
in the member’s office.
And he stated, that is, Brother Knorr stated,
this—the member’s office—
this is where “the most important
“as well as the most difficult work
takes place.
That’s why I do so little of it.”
Isn’t that beautiful?
That’s a humble statement.
You know what I say behind it?
I say “Amen” to it.
I’m on the Writing Committee
of the Governing Body
for some unknown reason.
I can’t write,
not a lick,
but there I am.
The humility shown by Brother Knorr
made me think back in time
to when a group of traveling overseers
were attending school
in Crownsville, Maryland.
Brother Ted Jaracz
was one of the instructors,
and he got up early one morning
and prepared a hot breakfast for all of us.
He did that on his own.
I was one of the instructors,
but it didn’t cross my mind
to do a thing like that.
Maybe I wasn’t humbly humble,
or if I was, I didn’t show it.
I can’t cook either,
not a lick.
What does it take to be exalted?
Let’s let the Bible answer at Luke 14:11:
“For everyone who exalts himself
will be humbled,
and whoever humbles himself
will be exalted.”
What does it take?
It takes humility.
Don’t learn that others are superior
the hard way.
Take a lesson
from my old hound dog named Booser.
Sometimes he would follow us to town.
And one day, we passed a home
where usually there was
a little dog that lived there,
but he had died.
And something caught Booser’s nose,
and so Booser
was sniffing around, sniffing around.
And he went over near the house,
and a big Dalmatian
came charging around the side of the house,
and he attacked Booser.
Booser put up a fight,
but he lost,
and the Dalmatian won.
Booser tucked his tail between his legs,
and he darted out of there
like a streak of lightning.
Well, a couple of weeks later,
Booser wanted to go to town
with us again—walking.
But we noticed that when we got
to the Dalmatian’s house,
Booser was gone.
Booser took a long trip around the house
and met us downtown.
We’re about to wrap this up.
He was humbly humble.
He viewed the Dalmatian as superior.
Now, students,
do you get the point of Booser’s example?
View others as superior.
They probably are.
That was a fantastic talk
—and I assure you,
Sam is a very humble person.
He just can’t cook.
Well, we have a few announcements for you.
First of all,
you’ll be interested in the attendance.
In Canada, there are 902.
And here in the United States, 9,702
for a total of 10,604.
Now, of course, we know
that with the streaming many,
many more are going to be looking in
on the program later.
So it’s going to be a lot more than 10,000.
Now, we’ve had some beautiful expressions
from the branches
—greetings to our students.
We don’t have time to read all of them.
They will go in the archives
of the Teaching Committee.
If I can’t read all of them,
I don’t want to read just one or two.
But here are the countries
that are represented
that have sent beautiful expressions to us:
Angola, Argentina,
Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil,
Britain, Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada,
Finland, France, Georgia,
Ghana, Haiti, Hong Kong, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Korea,
Madagascar, Mozambique,
Netherlands, Nigeria,
Papua New Guinea, Portugal,
Sierra Leone, Thailand, and Ukraine.
And that’s just about
the end of the alphabet.
So we appreciate all of these greetings
—beautiful expressions of appreciation
from the folks in these branches.
Well, we go back to 1943,
and following the principal talk,
what happened?
Here’s what we read
—here’s the report:
‘A large case containing the diplomas
‘was opened and put on the podium table.
‘One by one all the students were called
to come forward to receive their diplomas.’
Well, we’re going to follow
that pattern right now;
that pattern established 75 years ago.
And I’m very happy to have
Brother David Schafer with me.
If you were present
for the introductions of the class,
you know what a beautiful job David did
with all the names of the students.
And so, behold
the 144th class of Gilead.
And first, we have Brother and Sister Abou
who will be returning to the Middle East.
Brother and Sister Aloi
will be serving in the Middle East.
Brother and Sister Arruda
will be returning to Brazil.
Brother and Sister Bascopé
will be returning to Bolivia.
Brother Buchan will be returning to Britain.
Brother and Sister Chilton
will be serving in South Africa.
Sister Choatkaew
will be returning to Thailand.
Brother and Sister de Rooij
will be returning to the Netherlands.
Brother and Sister Esabunor
will be returning to Nigeria.
Brother and Sister Guillén
will be returning to Venezuela.
Brother Juhtver will be returning to Estonia.
Brother and Sister Kelly
will be returning to Hong Kong.
Brother Lartey will be returning to Ghana.
Brother and Sister Menjou
will be returning to Britain.
Brother and Sister Miçani
will be returning to Albania.
Sister Nguyễn will be returning to Asia.
Sister Ningi will be returning
to Papua New Guinea.
Brother Nkurunziza
will be returning to Burundi.
Brother Ouédraogo will be returning to Benin.
Brother and Sister Pétursson
will be returning to Denmark.
Brother and Sister Sandy
will be returning to Sierra Leone.
Brother and Sister Santos
will be returning to Portugal.
Brother Scarmato
will be returning to Argentina.
Brother and Sister Stepanov
will be returning to Azerbaijan.
Brother Tito will be returning to Mozambique.
Brother Tugushi will be returning to Georgia.
Brother Voyevodin will be returning to Asia.
Brother and Sister Wembalola
will be serving in Madagascar.
And Sister Wójcik
will be returning to Poland.
And here they are.
Let’s go back to 1943.
Once all the diplomas
were handed out, what happened?
Well, the report tells us
that a representative of the class
read a statement
expressing the students’ appreciation
for the privilege of attending Gilead
and assuring the Governing Body
of their loyalty
to Jehovah and his organization.
We’re going to follow the same pattern today,
and Brother Richard Chilton is going to read
a class letter on behalf of the class.
“To the Governing Body.
“Dear Brothers:
“Few things in life
bring greater satisfaction
“than meaningful discussions
on spiritual topics with dear friends.
“Over the last five months,
“we have enjoyed the blessing
“of being immersed
in such discussions on a daily basis.
“As we studied the Bible book by book,
“the examples
of faithful men and women of the past
“came to life and touched
our hearts in new ways.
“Reliving the modern-day history
of Jehovah's organization,
“we marveled at the faith,
“courage, and self-sacrifice
“of those who have gone before us.
“Our skills in the ministry
were refined through workshops,
“and our desire to share
in the preaching work intensified.
“As the weeks passed,
“fellow students became our close friends.
“Now, as the class has come to an end,
“tears come to our eyes
as we think about parting ways,
“but we will treasure the memories
“of the stimulating
‘interchange of encouragement’
“with our new group of friends.
“And what a blessing to be guided
by mature, devoted instructors
“who combined
‘spiritual matters with spiritual words.’
“We are grateful for their loving support
as they nurtured our spiritual growth,
“and we will never forget their example
of zeal for God’s Word.
“Getting to know the Bethel family
has been a real delight
“—young people
who expend themselves energetically
“in the service of the God they love
“and older ones who display the wisdom
“that comes with decades of experience
“in applying Christian principles.
“Their kindness, friendship,
“and hospitality have touched our hearts.
“Sometimes we think
we know our friends well,
“but our appreciation for them is enhanced
“as we find out more about good deeds
they have done in the past.
“This has been the case
in our relationship with our God.
“Jehovah constantly surprises
and delights us.
“As we reflect on all that he is
“and all that he has done,
“we feel moved to praise his beautiful name.
“While this school
has far exceeded our expectations,
“it has also left us longing for more.
“We are resolved to continue our program
“of meaningful personal study.
“As Moses said at Deuteronomy 30:11:
“‘This commandment . . .
is not . . . beyond your reach.
“It is not in the heavens, . . .
nor . . . on the other side of the sea.’
“In any situation,
we know we will always find
“an illuminating Scriptural principle,
“an encouraging thought,
or an informative article
“to help us to do what is right.
“Our Gilead course may be over,
“but we are left
with an even greater appreciation
“for the wealth of spiritual food
in our publications
“which remains to be explored.
“We would not exchange
the past five months for anything!
“We sincerely thank
the Governing Body for arranging
“for us to benefit
from this magnificent spiritual education,
“and we assure you
that we will do all we can
“to use these treasures to build up others.
Your brothers and sisters,
the 144th class of Gilead.”
Well, what more can we add?
All we can say is that we love you,
and we pray Jehovah’s rich blessing upon you,
and may this school of Gilead
continue to serve as a symbol
of the peace and unity
of Jehovah’s organization.